# r1-global-burden-of-disease

## Overview
The purpose of this assignment is to two-fold: first, to understand and assess **how disability weights are computed** for the Global Burden of Disease study, and, second, to consider the **ethical decisions involved in devising metrics**. You will be responsible for understanding the details of their procedures, but _do not necessarily_ need to understand the statistical methods employed. In order to appropriately answer the questions below, you will likely need to **read the papers multiple times**. I suggest that you skim each paper to get a broad understanding, then **re-read the paper** to understand the details.

For the responses below, a paragraph refers to a length of **4 - 5 sentences**.

## Disability weights for the Global Burden of Disease 2013 study

**1. Describe both the **intention** and **purpose** of this study. Make sure to describe _what it attempted to do_, as well as _why it is important_ in the broader context of global health. _(~1 paragraph, 5 points)_**

**Answer**
 The intention of this study was to build upon the **GBD 2010 Report** and assist in estimating disability weights in an attempt to quantify health levels associated with non fatal outcomes which further are used to calculate health losses due to injuries, accidents and other risk factors in the form of disability adjusted life years. Though this is a slightly difficult subject to tackle, it helps us understand and help populations in assessing and identifying segments that are burdened by health loss and quantifying these segments may help us effectively prioritise and make difficult decisions logically. It also serves as a stepping stone towards understanding the effect of disease, disability and health loss and not just premature loss of life as done previously. With the booming population today, access to medical aid and the general health of human life is subject of mounting importance. 
 The primary motives for this attempt were firstly, to include additional sequelae that were not a part of the 2010 report; secondly, estimate revised disablilty weights for sequelae that lacked proper lay descriptions and explanations in the 2010 study and thirdly assess a key assumption regarding assessments of health states being insensitive to duration of these states ( which was later found to be true). Since, the topic of the study is a rather sensitive one considering that we are attempting to quantify a health deficit which might be interpreted rather differently by a lay person, the study bases its findings on a paired comparison model, which makes it easier for people assessing these disabilities. 


**2. Who were the participants in the study (be sure to describe the **demographics groups** in your response)? Do you believe that their responses are applicable to all people (_why / why not_)? Using at **least one outside resource**, provide evidence to substantiate your claim (hint: find related papers). _(~1 - 2 paragraph, 5 points)_**

**Answer** 
 The participants in the GBD 2013 were primarily European in addition to the results of the GBD 2010 study which had data from household surveys from Bangladesh, Indonesia, Peru and Tanzania as well as computer assisted telephone based interviews conducted in USA and web based surveys which were open to the public and featured interviews from participants of over 150+ countries. The demographic that seems primary here based on sampling size seems to be the fairly educated, middle-aged individual. Web-based surveys seem to show a preponderance of a higher educated individual's opinion. Though not entirely represenatative of the opinions of the population of the whole world, this seems to be a significantly reasonable way to collect such large daunting amounts of qualitative data. Addition of more countries, representative of varied segments cross referenced by economic status, educational status as well as level of health development will be a step towards making the study more accurate. However, there seems to be a distinct lack of data from the African and Sub Saharan region which might have given a different bent to the interpretation of responses based on the socio-economic conditions prevalent there.
 In my opinion, the methods employed by the GBD 2010 and GBD 2013 study in sampling populations of these nations is an agreeable way of collecting this information primarily because it might reduce certain biases which might creep in if this data was collected from sets of health professionals which was the exact criticism that studies before this were subject to. For example, the 1996 version of the GBD 1990 used two forms of the person-trade-off (PTO) method to assess social preferences for health states and asked small groups of health professionals in weighting exercises to make a composite judgment on the severity distribution of the condition and the social preference for time spent in each severity level ( _Source: Murray, CJL. The global burden of disease: a comprehensive assessment of mortality and disability from diseases, injuries and risk factors in 1990 and projected to 2020, 1996_). Major criticism stemmed from valuation of health states related to the use of judgements from health professionals rather than the general population, or those with the conditions, and to the use of universal weights rather than weights that varied with social and cultural environment (_Source:WHO methods and data sources for global burden of disease estimates 2000-2011_).
  


**3. Explain (intuitively) how this study attempted to assess _how bad_ it is to have each disease using the **paired comparison model** described. In doing so, provide an example of a paired comparison question. _(~1 - 2 paragraphs, 5 points)_**

**Answer** 
 This study builds on the **paired comparison model** used in the 2010 GBD study and extends it to include various other types of health losses. The process followed for this model follows along the lines of  participants being given choices or comparisons of decriptions of two randomly chosen health states expressed in simple lay terms - from which they now need to judge and decide which is a healthier or less severe option. These were again split amongst the entire populace as a chronic or temporary framing (implying the time for which the said health state would last for where chronic implies the whole lifetime). Every participant was expected to make such a judgement for 15 such comparisons. There were 3 versions of the questionnaire - one version which had 15 paired comparisons with a chronic framing, second with a temporary framing and the third with five paired comparisons with a chronic framing and three population health equivalence questions. 
 As expressed succinctly in the paper, "The basic intuition of this modelling approach is that, in comparisons between states that produce similar losses of health, respondents are likely to disagree on which is healthier; in comparisons between states that produce very different health losses, respondents are more likely to agree on the ordering" (_Source: Disability Weights for the Global Burden of Disease study 2013_)
 An example for this can be something like 
"_Person 1_ suffered from severe headaches, nausea and vomiting for a week which lead to weakness and difficulty in doing their everyday occupation and 
_Person 2_ suffered from frequent bouts of loose motion, dehydration and elevated body temperature 
 Which of the two would be healthier/leading a better life if the above health states lasted for a week?"
 These symptoms might loosely be linked to migraine attacks and the stomach flu and asking participants about two completely different health states might elicit similar responses as opposed to similar ones which might lead to diasgreement in opinions and hence values.


**4. In addition to the _paired comparison_ technique, the paper also mentions (but does not describe) the use of _"population health equivalence"_ questions. Doing a bit of outside research, describe the strategy of using a population health equivalence question, and provide an example question. _(~1 paragraph, 5 points)_**

**Answer** 
The paper talks about using probit regression to analyse the 1,-1 and 0 assigned to responses (defined as 1 for the healthier alternative, -1 for the other alternative and 0 for the health states not included in the comparison) and then a second analytic step is taken to anchor these into the 0-1 disability scale which are computed using the **population health equivalence** questions which a randomly selected 30% of the respondents were subject to. However, the patterns of response of the European population health equivalence questions "were consistent with large proportions of respondents answering randomly, which compromised
the goal of scaling disability weights on the basis of the results of these responses" (Disability Weights for the Global Burden of Disease study 2013). Because of this observation, for the purpose of the 2013 study, the anchoring to the 0-1 scale was done using results from the web-based survey of the 2010 GBD study. 
PHE questions ask for a retrospective assessment that compares two hypothetical health programs. For example - 
"_Health Plan 1_ prevents 1000 people from an illness that results in a rapid death.
_Health Plan 2_ prevents 5000 people from an illness that results in lifelong symptoms of epilepsy
Which one do you think provides a greater health benefit to the society at large?"


**5. Which of the disability weight estimates did you find surprising and why (please list 3 or more)? _(~1 - 2 paragraphs, 5 points)_**

**Answer** 
 There were a few disability weights that I found rather surprising- more along the lines of theri gradation and the corresponding effect on  those disabilities. 
 For example- Amputation of both legs with treatment is listed at 0.088 whereas the same without treatment is listed at 0.443. Considering that in many third world countries and developing nations especially nations where healthcare is expensive or not covered by the government, such prolonged treatment for amputation might not be possible. In addition to this, even with some treatment, the kind of progress that a person might make might be largely based on various other socio-economic factors which should warrant a higher weight than 0.08. 
 Another set of weights that got me thinking were the ones linked to mental disorders. In a world today where a vast majority of developing countries do not consider mental illnesses as "real diseases", having these in perspective with actual physical known disorders helps people understand the health losses linked to these. For example, Tuberculosis is listed as 0.33 and a moderate episode of Depression is 0.39. These numbers help quantify the effects of these diseases and throw them into stark relief. 
 Considering the note on deafness and a marked change in its value from the previous study, I was drawn to looking at the various subsets in the column and I found it surprising that such disabilities were ranked lower ( Blindness - 0.187) than certain moderate to sever musculoskeletal health problems like neck and back pain (severe neck pain - 0.229 and severe back pain -0.325) which often can be cured and might/might not be lifelong. 
 However, that being said, I also thought that disability weights and their significance may vary based on various socio-economic factors- for example in a country plagued with poor access to health care and neonatal fatalties, mental health illness may not be as significant as it would be in a more developed country. 

## Quantifying the burden of disease: the technical basis for disability-adjusted life years.

**1. Despite variation in life expectancy across countries, a single standard life expectancy is used to calculate years of life lost. Describe why this decision was made. _(1 paragraph, 5 points)_.**

**Answer** 
 A single standard life expectancy is used throughout the world firstly to ensure constancy and ease of access to these values and secondly, and more importantly, as referenced in the paper, choosing one family of model life-tables over any other makes little or no difference to the results at such a low mortality level. Thus even for ages beyond the standard age of life expectancy will contribute to the global burden of disease and all other ages will contribute equally to the total estimated burden of disease (_Source: Quantifying the burden of disease: the technical basis for disability-adjusted life years_). There however is a difference in genderwise life expectancy which is set at 80 for males and 82.5 for females owing to various risk factors in young males. However in high income low mortality groups, this gap narrows considerably. Mathematical terms apart, having a standard life expectancy throughout the population also aids in effective comparison across various countries and helps in eliminating biases that may enter calculations. For example: if we do consider life expectancies in different countries to be different, the DALY calculations for each of those countries will be computed differently and hence it wouldn't be fair to compare them with each other. Holding every person accountable to the same life expectancy and then accounting for disabilities during their lifetime to calculate DALYs. 


**2. Describe the concept of _age-weighting_ as it applies to DALY computation. Then, provide a **thoughtful and persuasive argument** for either including or excluding _age-weighting_ in DALY computation. You must **pick a side** in your response. _(~2 paragraphs, 10 points)_**

**Answer** 
 **Age Weighting** in DALY calculations broadly means the inclusion of age as a factor in DALY calculations. However, the implications of this inclusion have far reaching effects on not just the numbers that we obtain but more deeply into how we value human life as a whole. Age weighting implies that a person in their middle ages ( say 25-45 ) has a higher social value of that time lost. This draws largely from the **Theory of Human Capital** which views individuals as a type of machine with costs of maintenence and expected output. This age-weighting system means that an individual disabled at 30 years of age, for ten years, would be measured as having a greater burden of disease than somebody disabled by the same disease or injury at the age of 70 for ten years. Critics maintain that this method makes it so that we value young adults and middle aged individuals at the expense of children and older individuals. However, supporters argue that this reflects society's interest in productivity and obtaining returns on its investment in children who grow up to be productive, output producing individuals. 
 In my opinion, age weighting should not be a factor especially so in a calculation that attempts to measure the burden of disease in the general populace with the aim of increasing heath benefits to people and not calculate the efficiency of said populace to generate economic benefit. Effectively in a broader sense, it places more importance on the life of a younger individual who can generate some economic or otherwise output in comparison to an older individual who is nearing the end of their life. Implementing a system like that could lead to benefits targted towards the younger population since they shall be considered "productive" and hence important. 
 The paper further talks about how this can be extended to other inequitable ways of discrimination and thought- "The logical extension of the human capital approach would be to weight time by other human attributes that correlate with productivity such as income, education, geographical location or even, in some economies, ethnicity. " (_Source: Disability Weights for the Global Burden of Disease study 2013_). Thus from "productive" it's a small leap to open discrimination of gender, wealth, nationality or even ethnicity. In a way it starts labeling the cost of life for an individual where an  older individual suffering from a state of health loss is considered subpar than a young adult suffering from the same state. This might go on to affect the efforts that will be made in the management and prevention of said health state since if it is a health state that plagues the older population, it will result in a smaller DALY number and hence a lower priority. On the other hand, if age was not a factor and only incidence was taken into account, the same health state will now be in the running with others and probably be prioritised higher. Thus including age weighting as a factor opens door to many kinds of biases in calculations as well as perception of disease burdens.


**3. Describe the concept of _discounting_ as it applies to DALY computation. Then, provide a **thoughtful and persuasive argument** for including/excluding _discounting_ in DALY computation. You must **pick a side** in your response. _(~2 paragraphs, 10 points)_**

**Answer**
 **Discounting** is a term often used in economics to evaluate the cost benefit of receiving something at a present date as compared to a future date. Murray states -" _time preference is the economic concept that individuals prefer benefits now rather than in the future_". Someone with a high time preference is more invested in their present and immediate future whereas someone with a low time preference might be focussed on the long term future. 
 In terms of DALY calculations, _Discounting_ will imply applying a higher weight to benefits arising in the present than the future. For studies before 2010, a discount rate of 3% was included in DALY calculations. This has now been abolished.
 Discounting does not seem to have a profound effect on health calculations - Would you cure someone today or one year later is highly subjective to many other factors. Or going further, if we do include discounting in our calculations, do 'x' deaths in the next 10 years equate to 2 deaths today? The choice of discount rate redistributes health services through time: a low or zero rate will favour those expecting sickness in the future and higher rates will favour the currently ill.
 When we exclude discounting from DALY calculations, we are implying that the value of life today and the value of life in the future are equal whereas if we did include discounting, we are implying that a life today values more than one in the future. In lay terms, if you were to save a 10 year old today and a 10 year old after 5 years, would the value of either child be less? DIscounting would put the value of the child in the future lower than the one today. It can also be seen as a Prevention vs Cure tradeoff- would you spend money on curing a disease that plagues a part of the population right now or would you rather spend it in research on saving a lot more lives in the future? Though it sounds like excluding discounting is making a case for being future oriented rather than the present, what it is actually doing is bring both at the same level for our consideration. If the deficit of DALYs in the future seem to be enormous (as compared to the presrnt) it only makes sense for us to account for them and prepare accordingly.
 In my opinion, discounting does not seem to be a very helpful addition to DALY calulations, also because it is not static but a composite variable dependent on a variety of different external factors which even if taken into account for purely mathematical purposes will need to be computed with regularity, accounting for the fluctuations of all its dependent variables. If the value of this changes, then there will be an effect on the value of the disability weights and all of them will have to be calculated again from scratch from the original data which is a serious impediment to transferability and transperancy of results.